hello it's ruby and today i am going to
be showing you a victorian morning
routine
so the morning starts at 7 30 a.m
a victorian upper class woman would have
been woken by her ladies maid
when i actually tried following this
morning routine that obviously didn't
happen but for the purposes of this
video my mum has stepped in
and pretended to be a ladies maid just
so you get a better idea of what this
would have looked like
so you might be wondering why this
window has been left open overnight
when it's winter that's because dr henry
chavez
taught that it was madness to sleep in a
room without ventilation
as a result people would always sleep
with their windows open
[Music]
so if it was too cold you could put a
bowl of water in the room instead
and it was thought that the water would
absorb all of the bad
toxins in the air
so first things first it is time for tea
tea would be brought up by a lady's maid
tea was an essential part of the morning
so not much has changed apparently
[Music]
so i drank this tea in bed and i really
enjoyed
drinking it whilst waking up to the
morning light it was such a massive
treat
and i kind of wish i could do this every
day
[Music]
it's now time to get ready it was very
unusual for women even women in higher
classes to have baths
men and children would bathe but women
tended to have a stand-up wash still in
their night dresses
in the mornings when they woke up some
people used cold water because they
thought it would improve circulation
but i used warm because it is january
and very cold the funny thing actually
if you wanted to use soap you had to use
hot water because
victorian soap wouldn't lather in cold
water
soap was still quite expensive and not
everyone could access it but the
industrial revolution
made soap cheaper and more accessible
with soap brands like pears coming about
you would dry with a flannel and then
put on powder from a powder puff
which would also be used as a deodorant
then it's time to get dressed victorian
ladies would be dressed by their ladies
maids but
i obviously didn't do that
after getting dressed there is more
getting ready so going back over to my
desk where i've got the wash basin set
up
a really key part of the victorian
women's morning routine was caring for
her hands
which i found really quite funny when i
was researching this so the first thing
is to put your hands in a bowl of warm
water for a few minutes to soften the
nails and
this actually feels so nice next you
would rub
lemon and nails to bleach them for a few
minutes
then she would trim and file her nails
then for five minutes on each hand
according to ruth goodman she would
polish the nails that is a long time
polishing your nails
and finally she would rub some hand
cream into her nails some of these rules
were outlined in
the lady's everyday book and it's really
fascinating to think that rituals like
this were so commonplace perfect nails
and very pale hands were very
fashionable in the victorian period
because it was a sign that somebody
hadn't worked
so the face would be washed with lemon
to remove blemishes that was
kind of the most popular face treatment
i really didn't like doing this i've got
to say it made my skin feel very sticky
next for hair at the start of the 19th
century people didn't actually wash
their hair
instead they would put a towel around
their shoulders as you can see me doing
here
and use a comb to brush out the dirt
this felt very strange to do and
definitely not like i was actually
cleaning my hair and it also took ages
to brush out my hair with a comb because
it's um quite long
then finally i put on some bergamot
essential oil
this alongside lemon was a really
popular scent in
the period
so next i headed downstairs in a
victorian up close house
servants could wake up as early as 5 a.m
and
light the fires this was so the house
would be warm for when the family woke
up but you can see that there is such a
massive disparity
in terms of waking times with victorian
people
a really key part of a victorian morning
i learnt was
family morning prayers so ruth goodman
says that this would have been at about
8 30 a.m
and this was really key for christian
families
and served to unite them closer
breakfast then
[Music]
then next on to breakfast so cook aka me
prepared some porridge which was a
common breakfast food
and this would be enjoyed with tea or
hot chocolate actually
i went for tea because i do love tea but
i love that hot chocolate was this
staple drink to have with breakfast
mum and i had breakfast together and set
the table especially
because breakfast was an event it was
quite formal and
i actually really enjoyed treating
breakfast as something slightly more
formal because usually i
eat it by myself
so then after breakfast girls were
encouraged to
practice calisthenics girls are
dress up in white cotton with a skirt
long kind of bloomer trousers underneath
and a pretty sash
i didn't have what they recommended
exactly but i improvised
what i had this was a form of exercise
recommended for women because it could
be done from home
it was thought to improve posture and
strengthen the lungs meaning girls could
fight off respiratory diseases
um i found it was quite similar to the
arm exercises i do in ballet fit classes
but
it definitely didn't increase my heart
rate and i can't imagine this being my
main form of exercise but it was good
fun to try
thank you so much for watching today's
video it was one that i
loved filming i've been planning on
doing it for about a year and
i'm so glad i finally got around to
filming it let me know if you want me to
do
a victorian evening routine to you
because i'd love to do that
and i'm also planning on filming a
working class victoria morning routine
because daily life in the victorian
period differed so much over the
population
the class divide was staggering to give
you an idea in 1895
86.9 of the population in london
was poorer working class 10.7 were
middle class
2.2 were rich and 1 were millionaires
that is a massive wealth
and it means that daily experiences in
the victorian period differed so so much
i'm really aware that in this video i
have glamorized victorian life when
actually there was so much wrong in the
period
and there are things i love about the
victorian period i love the literature
that came out of it i the architecture
victorian furniture and i love the
atticas i think it's so interesting but
there were
massive systematic problems in victorian
england you know women didn't have the
right to vote
men who were working class didn't have
the right to vote until the reform act
there were so many problems and it's so
important to be aware of that when
you're looking at the victorian period
because it's so easy to glamorize it
when you just look at a cross section
so i really want to try recreating a
working class morning routine to you
just to kind of show you how different
they are anyway thank you so much for
watching this video i hope you enjoyed
watching it and
i hope that you have a productive week
it's so nice i really like that
[Music]
you